# Cpp-Monte-Carlo-Value-at-Risk-Engine

## Background and overview

This program is the culmination of two months of work to create a fully functional and comprehensive Monte Carlo Value at Risk engine for calculating the risk of a financial portfolio, on a total portfolio level as well as on an individual instrument level. The program was written in my spare time immediately following graduating with a Master’s degree in Financial Mathematics while at the same time working full time as a quantitative analyst at an investment bank. The task was undertaken with the motivation of solidifying my knowledge of the fundamentals of risk and valuations calculations and teaching myself proper usage of C++ as a tool for implementing sound financial engineering solutions with object-oriented programming.

The knowledge base drawn upon when implementing the financial models in C++ primarily comes from the book C++ Design Patterns and Derivatives Pricing by Mark Joshi. The program as such readily makes use of design patterns to produce reusable and extensible code following the open/closed principle of object-oriented programming. This has resulted in a code base that can be seamlessly extended in a logical way to handle additional functionality such as support for additional instrument types and calculations of different statistics (VaR itself being one statistic), one could even straightforwardly extend the program by adding additional stochastic processes for the path simulations of the risk factors such as a jump diffusion processes or allowing for stochastic volatility.

## Structure and components of the program

Attached in the repository is a class diagram of the program showing the structure of the system. The system comprises the core MCEngine class where the Monte Carlo simulation takes place along with 3 key base classes that together make up the structure of the program. These are the pure virtual classes: SimulationEngine, ValuationFunction and MCStatistics. 

An object of the class ValuationFunction serves the purpose of representing one position in the portfolio, it has members such as nominal and uniqueIdentifier that describe the position with instrument specific attributes such as the spot value of an underlying risk factor or the implied volatility of an instrument being members of the relevant derived classes. Examples of such derived classes are various equity derivatives, Bonds and IRS, and FX forwards. The primary function of the ValuationFunction is to value the position which is done in the function ValueInstrument for each path in the Monte Carlo simulation. Note that the ValueInstrument function itself may employ heavy numerical procedures when necessary, such as constructing a binomial tree for American options or a Monte Carlo simulation on a position level to value derivatives like rainbow options where no other approach is suitable.

The SimulationEngine class takes care of the path simulation for each of the underlying risk factors that affect the portfolio and takes as input in its constructor an object of type ValuationFunction (the custom made pointer class Wrapper facilitates inputs of virtual objects and is frequently employed throughout the code for this purpose). One derived class of ValuationFunction is FunctionCombiner which stores several inner ValuationFunctions and passes along in each of its functions the task to the inner functions, as such an object of type SimulationEngine can be told to simulate one risk factor in several instruments on the same underlying. The ValuationFunctions are passed into the SimulationEngine using the smart pointer shared_ptr and care is taken to only value each instrument once for each path (regardless of how many times it’s submitted to the engine) and as such it’s possible to also simulate several risk factors for one instrument. An example would be to stress both the exchange rate and the base currency discounting rate when simulating the value of an FX forward. The primary function of the SimulationEngine is to simulate a path of the underlying risk factor which is done in the function DoOnePath. This is a pure virtual function that is implemented in each of the derived classes according to the type of stochastic process simulated, currently there is functionality for simulating a geometric Brownian motion in the derived class OneStepBSEngine, suitable for vanilla equity derivatives and FX rates, and for simulating a simple Brownian motion in OneStepBrownianMotionEngine, suitable for interest rates. Functionality for additional stochastic processes as described previously can be achieved by simply implementing the virtual functions in a new derived SimulationEngine class. Care is also taken in the function DoOnePath to handle the edge cases where the VaR horizon is greater than the time to maturity of an instrument, at which point it will only simulate a path up to the maturity of that instrument instead of the entire VaR horizon.

The MCStatistics class is delegated the task of aggregating the results of the Monte Carlo simulation and processing it in order to produce meaningful statistics, such as the Value at Risk, from the simulation. Because of its generality the MCStatistics is also used to aggregate results from the Monte Carlo option valuations done in each step for e.g. Rainbow options. In the same vein as with ValuationFunction and FunctionCombiner we have a derived MCStatistics class StatisticsCompiler, and just as the FunctionCombiner allows the simulation of several instruments for one risk factor StatisticsCompiler allows the usage of several derived MCStatistics for the same Monte Carlo portfolio simulation so that you may produce several statistics as needed. Some examples of MCStatistics derived classes are: relative VaR, relative Expected Shortfall, forward mean value, and a convergence table which takes as input any MCStatistics. All of these can be freely combined using the StatisticsCompiler. The MCStatistics class saves the statistics in a two dimensional vector of doubles which can be retrieved and outputted after simulation. An additional related, but not derived, class that is used in the simulation is InstrumentStatisticsGatherer which as the name implies does very much the same thing as the MCStatistics classes but on an individual position basis. Much like the StatisticsCompiler the InstrumentStatisticsGatherer takes as input in its constructor a vector of MCStatistics objects.

On top of the classes derived from these three base classes there is an ensemble of helper classes to facilitate their usage along with a few more general classes and functions for numerical computations or tasks such as producing a covariance matrix from time series and creating correlated normal variates for the simulation using a Cholesky decomposition as in the class GetArraysOfCorrelatedGauassiansByBoxMuller.

The core class that instructs the sequencing of the Monte Carlo Value at Risk simulation is, as previously mentioned, the class MCEngine which takes as input in its constructor: a vector of SimulationEngine objects (each having as a member an object of type ValuationFunction) here called EngineVector, and the covariance matrix of the risk factors going into the simulation. It is when calling the DoSimulation function of the MCEngine that the magic happens. The DoSimulation function takes as arguments an object of type MCStatistics, an object of type InstrumentStatisticsGatherer, as well as the time horizon and the number of iterations that will be carried out in the simulation. By and large DoSimulation works by for each iteration carrying out the following tasks:
1. Simulating paths for the underlying risk factors using the different SimulationEngine objects in EngineVector
2. Valuing the instruments and portfolio using the functionality provided in the ValuationFunction objects
3. Saving the results in the two statistics gathering objects.

Care is taken to make this process as optimized as possible but the computational bottleneck will in most cases be in 2. as a full re-valuation of the instruments needs to be completed for each iteration.

## Setting up the simulation in the main function

An example of a risk calculation being done for a portfolio is given in the main function of the program. In order to run the simulation we first need to calculate a covariance matrix of the risk factors and find the current spot rates for the underlyings. These preliminary tasks are handled by the class TimeSeriesHandler which transforms a two dimensional vector of closing prices to returns and then calculates the sample covariance matrix. Additional functionality could be added to support more refined methods such as exponentially weighted moving averages for the calculation of the covariance matrix. The class CSVReader allows the input of a headerless CSV file of closing prices for a series of risk factors from which the covariance matrix can be calculated. A short python script can be found in the repository which extracts these values from Yahoo Finance and saves them to a CSV file. The covariance matrix and spot rates can of course also manually be inputted.

After this is done the positions are created as Shared_ptr objects pointing to derived ValuationFunction classes. The positions are then grouped into FunctionCombiner objects in the way that they will be simulated in the SimulationEngine objects which are then also created.
At this point we may wish to value the initial portfolio and instruments and output the result, which is done in the example. Continuing on the MCStatistics objects are created as needed (and compiled together in a StatisticsCompiler object) along with a InstrumentStatisticsGatherer object. At this point we have all the ingredients needed to run our simulation and we do so by calling DoSimulation with our created covariance matrix, StatisticsCompiler, desired number of paths, and VaR horizon. The results are carefully outputted from the StatisticsCompiler and InstrumentStatisticsGatherer to show the simulation results.
